Docs 2.0 New Documentation. Batch 1 of content for review (#672)
graknlabs/docs: 0001-typedb/01-start/04-iam-schema.md

</div>

## Overview

As with any [TypeDB schema](../02-dev/02-schema.md), the IAM schema consists of:

- Types
  - Entity types
  - Relation types
  - Attribute types
- Rules

Read the schema documentation to better understand the terminology of TypeDB schemas.

The main entity types in the IAM schema:

- Subject — Active entity in the [system] that performs operations on objects. 
  - User — Human or IT entity possibly interacting with the [system] from outside of the [system] boundary.
    - Person — User with `credentials`, `email`, and `full-name` attributes.
  - User-group — A group of users that share the same role.
- Object — Passive entity in the [system], that contains or receives information, and upon which subjects perform
  operations. 
  - Resource — Anything usable or consumable in the [system].
    - File — File in some filesystem with path [to the file] and size (in KB) attributes.
  - Resource-collection — A collection of resources on which the same operations can be performed.
- Action — An operation or operation set that can be performed on a specific type of object. Its name is stored in
  the `action-name` attribute.

> 

Reviewer: "[system]" and "[to the file]" are used above. What does this formatting mean?

Author: IAM as in Identity and access management is a solution that usually serves as a part of access control in some system (for example, a banking client-server solution). And [system] here is whatever solution/system that is we are integrated in. So a user would be a user of the system and so on.

Author: I'll update the syntax here. Will probably use italics for system and usual parenthesis `()` for to the file clarification.

- Access — A relation that relates an object to a valid action performed on the object.

The types mentioned above combined together in a schema will look like this:

![IAM core schema](../../images/iam/simplified.png)

The illustration above is not the full IAM schema but only the most important part of it. The least important parts
have been omitted from the image to reduce the complexity of the schema. For a full version, please see the image in
the Full schema section below.

## Permission and Access relations

One of the core elements of the IAM schema is the relationships between subject and object entity types that allow 
us to set permissions to access something.

There are two relation types involved:

- permission
- access

Permission relation connects a `subject` (e.g. `person`) via a `permitted-subject` role and access relation via 
`permitted-access` role.

Access relation connects an `object` (e.g. `file`) via an `accessed-object` role, `action` (e.g. `view_file`) via the 
`valid-action` role, and plays a role of `permitted-access` in a `permission` relation.

![Permission and access relations](../../images/iam/permission-access.png)

> Taken together, a `subject` has permission to perform a specific action on a specific object. For example, John Smith 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Taken together, a `subject` has permission to perform a specific action on a specific object. For example, `John Smith` 
```

has permission to read the `README.md` file.

## Object subtypes

> The object is a subtype of the built-in entity type with multiple subtypes of its own:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Object` is a subtype of the built-in Entity type with multiple subtypes of its own:
```

- Object
  - Resource
    - File
    - Interface
    - Record
  - Resource-collection
    - Application
    - Directory
    - Table
    - Database

### File entity

> File type is not a direct subtype of the object type, but a subtype of the resource type, that is a subtype of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `File` type is not a direct subtype of the `Object` type, but rather a subtype of the `Resource` type, which is a subtype of the
```

> object type. That also makes the file type a subtype of the object type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Object` type. That also makes the `File` type a subtype of the `Object` type.
```

> The resource subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the object type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Resource` subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the `Object` type.
```

> File type plays the same roles as Object supertype.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `File` type plays the same roles as `Object` supertype.
```

> It has all the attributes the Object supertype has and two attributes of its own:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has all the attributes the `Object` supertype has and also two attributes of its own:
```

- `path` — path to the file on the filesystem
- `size-kb` — the size of the file in KB

## Subject subtypes

> The subject is a subtype of the built-in entity type with multiple subtypes of its own:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`Subject` is a subtype of the built-in Entity type with multiple subtypes of its own:
```

- Subject
  - User
    - Person
  - User-group
    - Business-unit
    - User-account
    - User-role

### Person entity

> Person type is not a direct subtype of the subject type. It is a subtype of the user type, that is a direct subtype of 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `Person` type is not a direct subtype of the `Subject` type. It is a subtype of the `User` type, which is a direct subtype of 
```

> the subject type. That also makes the person type a subtype of the subject type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `Subject` type. That also makes the `Person` type a subtype of the `Subject` type.
```

> But the user subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the subject type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But the `User` subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the `Subject` type.
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: In this file particularly, I think we should be sure that every time we refer to some concept in TypeQL or code that it is surrounded by backticks. We get relaxed with this at the bottom.

`permitted-access` role.

Access relation connects an `object` (e.g. `file`) via an `accessed-object` role, `action` (e.g. `view_file`) via the 
`valid-action` role, and plays a role of `permitted-access` in a `permission` relation.

![Permission and access relations](../../images/iam/permission-access.png)

Taken together, a `subject` has permission to perform a specific action on a specific object. For example, John Smith 
has permission to read the `README.md` file.

## Object subtypes

The object is a subtype of the built-in entity type with multiple subtypes of its own:

- Object
  - Resource
    - File
    - Interface
    - Record
  - Resource-collection
    - Application
    - Directory
    - Table
    - Database

### File entity

File type is not a direct subtype of the object type, but a subtype of the resource type, that is a subtype of the
object type. That also makes the file type a subtype of the object type.

The resource subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the object type.

File type plays the same roles as Object supertype.

It has all the attributes the Object supertype has and two attributes of its own:

> - `path` — path to the file on the filesystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `path` — the path to the file on the filesystem
```

- `size-kb` — the size of the file in KB

## Subject subtypes

The `subject` is a subtype of the built-in `entity` type with multiple subtypes of its own:

- Subject
  - User
    - Person
  - User-group
    - Business-unit
    - User-account
    - User-role

### Person entity

Person type is not a direct subtype of the subject type. It is a subtype of the user type, that is a direct subtype of 
the subject type. That also makes the person type a subtype of the subject type.

But the user subtype doesn't have any relations or attributes of its own, only those inherited from the subject type.

Person type plays the same roles as subject supertype.

It has all the attributes the subject supertype has and two attributes of its own:

> - `full-name` — full name of the person. Usually includes first name and last name.
> - `email` — E-mail address of the person.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `full-name` — the full name of the person. Usually includes first name and last name.
- `email` — the email address of the person.
```

## Action entity

Action is an abstract type (a subtype of the built-in entity type) that has three attributes:

- action-name
- object-type
- parent-company

> Additionally, action can play role in multiple relations:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Additionally, action can play a role in multiple relations:
```

- `access` relation as role `valid-action`
- `company-membership` as role `company-member`
- `segragation-policy` as role `segregated-action`
- `set-membership` as role `set-member`

Finally, action has two subtypes, which are not abstract, so we can create instances of those subtypes:

- `operation` — a single action type that can be performed with an object
- `operation-set` — a set of actions that can be performed with an object

Both subtypes inherit all the attribute and relation types defined in the action type.

## Membership subtypes

> There is a membership relation type that has multiple subtypes for different kinds of relations, regarding membership 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Membership is a relation type that has multiple subtypes for different kinds of relations, regarding membership 
```

If acceptable, propagate this to ownership as well.

Reviewer 2: This is more in line with our 'Action entity' section and reads nicer imo.

in groups:
- Membership
  - `collection-membership` — combines objects in resource-collections
  - `group-membership` — combines subjects in user-groups
  - `set-membership` — combines actions in operation-sets

## Ownership subtypes

There is an ownership relation type that has multiple subtypes for different kinds of relations, regarding ownership 
groups:

- Ownership
  - `object-ownership` — assigns an owner of the subject type for an object
  - `group-ownership` — assigns an owner of the subject type for a user-group

## Segregation policy

Relation type that adds information on [duty segregation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Separation_of_duties) policies. 
It has a name attribute and a single role segregated-action. Usually, multiple instances of this role in a single 
relation mean these actions can’t be performed by one person.

## Rules

There are multiple rules in the schema that can be used in different situations and queries.

> 1. Attribute-parent-company

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `attribute-parent-company`
```
etc

2. Automatic-member-collection
3. Automatic-root-collection
4. Transitive-membership
5. Transitive-object-access
6. Transitive-action-access
7. Transitive-subject-permission
8. Transitive-object-permission
9. Transitive-action-permission
10. Automatic-segregation-violation
11. Automatic-permission-invalidity
12. Automatic-permission-validity
13. Add-view-access

### Add-view-access rule

This simple rule illustrates basic inference. More information on rules can be found in the 
[schema documentation](../02-dev/02-schema.md).

<!-- test-ignore -->
```typeql
define

rule add-view-access:

> when {
> $modify isa action, has action-name "modify_file";
> $view isa action, has action-name "view_file";
> $ac_modify (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $modify) isa access;
> $ac_view (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $view) isa access;
> (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_modify) isa permission;
> } then {
> (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_view) isa permission;
> };

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
when {
    $modify isa action, has action-name "modify_file";
    $view isa action, has action-name "view_file";
    $ac_modify (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $modify) isa access;
    $ac_view (accessed-object: $obj, valid-action: $view) isa access;
    (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_modify) isa permission;
} then {
    (permitted-subject: $subj, permitted-access: $ac_view) isa permission;
};
```

```

The when section defines the following conditions:

1. An `action` entity with `action-name` "modify_file", assigned `$modify` variable.
2. An `action` entity with `action-name` "view_file", assigned `$view` variable.
3. An `access` relation, that relates some `object` (`$obj`) to `$modify` as `valid-action` role, assigned `$ac_modify` 
   variable.
4. The similar relation but with `$view` instead and assigned `$ac_view` variable.
5. A `permission` relation, that relates some `subject` (`$subj`) as `permitted-subject` to the `$ac_modify` as 
   `permitted-access`.

The then section defines the data to infer:

1. A new permission relation, that relates the subject $subj as permitted-subject to $ac_view as permitted access.

<div class="note">
[Note]
These new permission relations, created by the rule, will not be persisted as they will be created inside a **read** 
transaction with inference option enabled. They will influence the result of the transaction but not the persisted 
database data.
</div>

#### Explanation

This rule for every subject that already has permission to modify_file action on any object, adds permission to 

> view_file on the same object for the same subject. In short, if someone has modify access to a file, then they have 

Reviewer 2: This first sentence is a little difficult to follow.
